<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<body>
<hr>
    <div class="chapter">
        <!--se:split--><h2><a id="chap01"></a>CHAPTER I.<br>OUR SOCIETY</h2>
        <p>
            One morning, when Gregor Samsa woke from troubled dreams, he found himself transformed
            in his bed into a horrible vermin. He lay on his armour-like back, and if he lifted his
            head a little he could see his brown belly, slightly domed and divided by arches into
            stiff sections. The bedding was hardly able to cover it and seemed ready to slide off
            any moment. His many legs, pitifully thin compared with the size of the rest of him,
            waved about helplessly as he looked.
        </p>
        <p>
            “What’s happened to me?” he thought. It wasn’t a dream. His room, a proper human room
            although a little too small, lay peacefully between its four familiar walls. A
            collection of textile samples lay spread out on the table—Samsa was a travelling
            salesman—and above it there hung a picture that he had recently cut out of an
            illustrated magazine and housed in a nice, gilded frame. It showed a lady fitted out
            with a fur hat and fur boa who sat upright, raising a heavy fur muff that covered the
            whole of her lower arm towards the viewer.
        </p>

        <p>
            “Mother, mother”, said Gregor gently, looking up at her. He had completely forgotten the
            chief clerk for the moment, but could not help himself snapping in the air with his jaws
            at the sight of the flow of coffee. That set his mother screaming anew, she fled from
            the table and into the arms of his father as he rushed towards her. Gregor, though, had
            no time to spare for his parents now; the chief clerk had already reached the stairs;
            with his chin on the banister, he looked back for the last time. Gregor made a run for
            him; he wanted to be sure of reaching him; the chief clerk must have expected something,
            as he leapt down several steps at once and disappeared; his shouts resounding all around
            the staircase. The flight of the chief clerk seemed, unfortunately, to put Gregor’s
            father into a panic as well. Until then he had been relatively self controlled, but now,
            instead of running after the chief clerk himself, or at least not impeding Gregor as he
            ran after him, Gregor’s father seized the chief clerk’s stick in his right hand (the
            chief clerk had left it behind on a chair, along with his hat and overcoat), picked up a
            large newspaper from the table with his left, and used them to drive Gregor back into
            his room, stamping his foot at him as he went. Gregor’s appeals to his father were of no
            help, his appeals were simply not understood, however much he humbly turned his head his
            father merely stamped his foot all the harder. Across the room, despite the chilly
            weather, Gregor’s mother had pulled open a window, leant far out of it and pressed her
            hands to her face. A strong draught of air flew in from the street towards the stairway,
            the curtains flew up, the newspapers on the table fluttered and some of them were blown
            onto the floor. Nothing would stop Gregor’s father as he drove him back, making hissing
            noises at him like a wild man. Gregor had never had any practice in moving backwards and
            was only able to go very slowly. If Gregor had only been allowed to turn round he would
            have been back in his room straight away, but he was afraid that if he took the time to
            do that his father would become impatient, and there was the threat of a lethal blow to
            his back or head from the stick in his father’s hand any moment. Eventually, though,
            Gregor realised that he had no choice as he saw, to his disgust, that he was quite
            incapable of going backwards in a straight line; so he began, as quickly as possible and
            with frequent anxious glances at his father, to turn himself round. It went very slowly,
            but perhaps his father was able to see his good intentions as he did nothing to hinder
            him, in fact now and then he used the tip of his stick to give directions from a
            distance as to which way to turn. If only his father would stop that unbearable hissing!
            It was making Gregor quite confused. When he had nearly finished turning round, still
            listening to that hissing, he made a mistake and turned himself back a little the way he
            had just come. He was pleased when he finally had his head in front of the doorway, but
            then saw that it was too narrow, and his body was too broad to get through it without
            further difficulty. In his present mood, it obviously did not occur to his father to
            open the other of the double doors so that Gregor would have enough space to get
            through. He was merely fixed on the idea that Gregor should be got back into his room as
            quickly as possible. Nor would he ever have allowed Gregor the time to get himself
            upright as preparation for getting through the doorway. What he did, making more noise
            than ever, was to drive Gregor forwards all the harder as if there had been nothing in
            the way; it sounded to Gregor as if there was now more than one father behind him; it
            was not a pleasant experience, and Gregor pushed himself into the doorway without regard
            for what might happen. One side of his body lifted itself, he lay at an angle in the
            doorway, one flank scraped on the white door and was painfully injured, leaving vile
            brown flecks on it, soon he was stuck fast and would not have been able to move at all
            by himself, the little legs along one side hung quivering in the air while those on the
            other side were pressed painfully against the ground. Then his father gave him a hefty
            shove from behind which released him from where he was held and sent him flying, and
            heavily bleeding, deep into his room. The door was slammed shut with the stick, then,
            finally, all was quiet.
        </p>
    </div><!--end chapter--> <!--end chapter--> <!--end chapter-->
</hr>
</body>
</html>